How to Run Task 1

1. Go to the project root.
Run this in every new terminal used for this project:

cd path/to/turtlebot-semantic-maze-explorer


2. Start XQuartz.
Run this when XQuartz is not already open:

open -a XQuartz


3. Allow local XQuartz connections.
Run these once per XQuartz session. Repeat them after starting a new XQuartz session:

export DISPLAY=:0
xhost +localhost


4. Set the display address for Docker containers.
Run this in every new terminal window or tab that will start Docker GUI commands such as Gazebo or RViz2:

export DISPLAY=host.docker.internal:0


5. Build the Docker image.
Run this once before the first launch:

docker compose build overlay

Run it again only if the Docker image was deleted, Docker asks for a rebuild, or project dependencies/Docker files changed.

6. Launch the TurtleBot maze simulation.
Run this every time the maze simulation needs to start:

docker compose up demo-world

Keep this terminal open while the simulation is running.

7. Open a ROS 2 shell.
In a second terminal, run this every time a separate ROS 2 command-line shell is needed:

cd path/to/turtlebot-semantic-maze-explorer
export DISPLAY=host.docker.internal:0
docker compose run --rm overlay bash


8. Verify ROS 2.
Inside the container, run:

ros2 node list
ros2 topic list
ros2 service list


9. Stop the simulation.
Press Ctrl+C in the simulation terminal, then run:

docker compose down


Environment Prerequisites:

1. Docker Desktop must be installed.

2. Docker Desktop should be running before using docker compose commands.

3. Docker Desktop should have enough resources allocated:
CPU: at least 4 cores
Memory: around 5 GB
Disk: at least 30 GB available

4. Docker host networking should be enabled if required by the environment.

5. XQuartz must be installed for macOS GUI display support.

6. XQuartz should allow local/network client connections.

7. The TurtleBot simulation repository must already be cloned.

8. The terminal should be opened in the project root before running Docker commands.

9. VS Code and the Docker/Dev Containers extensions are optional, but useful for inspecting the project.
